\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename ../../info/gpr-mode
@settitle gpr Mode

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2013  Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU Manual'',
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to copy and
modify this GNU manual.  Buying copies from the FSF supports it in
developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs editing modes
@direntry
* gpr mode: (gpr-mode).         Emacs mode for editing and navigating gpr files (gnat project files).
@end direntry

@titlepage
@sp 10
@title{gpr Mode}
@sp 2
@subtitle An Emacs major mode for editing and navigating gpr files
@sp 2
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top, Overview, (dir), (dir)

@ifnottex
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::
* Installation::
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Overview, Installation, Top, Top
@chapter Overview
gpr files are the project files used by the GNAT compiler and
associated tools. They describe search paths, compiler options, etc.

@xref{GNAT Project Manager,,GNAT Project Manager,gnat_ugn,GNAT Pro
User's Guide}, for general information on gpr files.

The Emacs mode for gpr files helps the user in reading
existing code and facilitates writing new code.

When you open a file with a file extension of @file{.gpr}, Emacs will
automatically load and activate gpr mode.

@node Installation, , Overview, Top
@chapter Installation

gpr mode is part of the standard Emacs distribution; if you use that,
no files need to be installed.

gpr mode is also available as a separate distribution (bundled with
Ada mode), from the Emacs Ada mode website
@uref{http://stephe-leake.org/emacs/ada-mode/emacs-ada-mode.html}. The
separate distribution may be more recent.

For installing the separate distribution, see the @file{README} file
in the distribution.

gpr mode does not have a separate version; it uses the Ada mode
version number. To see what version of Ada mode you have installed, do
@kbd{M-x ada-mode-version}.

@node GNU Free Documentation License, Index, , Top
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include doclicense.texi

@node Index,  , GNU Free Documentation License, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex fn

@bye
