\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@settitle gpr-query

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2022  Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU Manual'',
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to copy and
modify this GNU manual.  Buying copies from the FSF supports it in
developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* gpr-query: (gpr-query).         Minor mode providing cross-reference information from the GNAT compiler.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@sp 10
@title gpr-query Version 1.0.1
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Overview, (dir), (dir)
@top Top

gpr-query Version 1.0.1

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

gpr-query is an Emacs minor mode that provides an xref backend using
cross-reference information output by the GNAT compiler. It uses an
external program @code{gpr_query} to interface to the information.

It can also be used with the wisi package, as ada-mode does.

@code{gpr_query} is similar to the AdaCore utility @code{gnatxref},
but supports additional queries.

When @code{gpr_query} reads the compiler output, it caches the results in a
database. As the code is edited and compiled, that database gets out
of date. It can be refreshed by invoking @key{C-c C-q}, which is bound
to @code{wisi-refresh-prj-cache}.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

The easiest way to install @code{gpr_query} is via the Ada package
mangager Alire. You can also install the required libraries manually,
and then build @code{gpr_query} manually.

If you are building with Alire, and planning to use gpr-query with the
system Ada compiler (ie, not one provided by Alire), then you must
first tell Alire to use that compiler to compile and install
gpr-query. To do this:
@example
alr toolchain --select --local gnat_external
@end example

Sometimes Alire does not properly detect a corresponding external
gprbuild; then you must use the toolchain assistant:
@example
alr toolchain --select --local
@end example

You can also install a compiler provided by Alire in an external
directory, to be used outside Alire:
@example
alr toolchain --install --install-dir $HOME/.local gnat_native
alr toolchain --install --install-dir $HOME/.local gprbuild
@end example

Then add the installed @code{bin} directories to your @code{PATH}.


In any case, after installing the gpr-query ELPA package:
@example
cd ~/.emacs.d/elpa/gpr-query-1.0.x
./build.sh
./install.sh
@end example

Both scripts will use Alire if @code{alr} is found in @code{PATH};
otherwise, they use @code{gprbuild} and @code{gprinstall}.

By default, @file{install.sh} installs the parser executable in the
same directory as the GNAT executable (using @file{gprinstall}),
because it depends on data output by the compiler, which can change
with the compiler version. If you don't have write privileges there,
or if you want to install somewhere else, use @code{install.sh
--prefix=<dir>}.

When building manually, @code{gpr_query} requires the @code{GNATCOLL}
library provided by AdaCore, distributed with GNAT GPL 2017 or later,
and also available at Github
(@url{https://github.com/AdaCore/gnatcoll}). The parser builds with
the gnatcoll distributed with the gnat compiler. However, that
gnatcoll does not include the xref package, which is required by
@code{gpr_query}. So we must build gnatcoll xref from sources
downloaded from github.

The notes below assume that the compiler is installed at
@file{$prefix}, e.g. @file{/usr/local/gnat-2019}, and that
@file{$prefix/bin} is first on the @code{PATH}. If you are running
Windows, use mingw64 @code{bash} to run these commands.

On some operating systems, we must install gnatcoll-iconv; other
operating systems don't need it.

In general, @code{gpr_query} should be compiled with the compiler
version that is used to generate the user project @file{.ali} files;
the @file{ali} file format can change with each compiler
version. @code{gpr_query} creates a database of cross reference
information; that database must be deleted if the compiler version
changes, to force a complete rebuild.

@file{gpr_query} requires the @code{pthread} library. On Windows, this
is available in Mingw64 as package
@code{mingw64/mingw-w64-x86_64-winpthreads-git}.

@menu
* Building GNATCOLL::
* Building the executables::
@end menu

@node Building GNATCOLL
@subsection Building GNATCOLL

The GNAT Community and GNAT pro binary installs have some of the
GNATCOLL packages we need, but we need to install others from source.

Debian 11 provides binary packages for the GNATCOLL packages we need;
@table @samp
@item libgnatcoll-db-bin
@item libgnatcoll-iconv20-dev
@item libgnatcoll-sql4-dev
@item libgnatcoll-sqlite20-dev
@item libgnatcoll-xref21-dev
@end table

Debian does not provide a binary for gnatstub.

If you are using GNAT Community, download gnatcoll-db from
@url{https://github.com/AdaCore/gnatcoll-db}; select the latest
release branch (or the one that matches your compiler), click on the
``clone or download'' button, select ``Download ZIP''.

If you are using GNAT Pro, download @file{gnatcoll-db.tar.gz} from the
GNAT Studio sources in GNAT Tracker.

Similarly, if needed for your OS, download gnatcoll-bindings from the
GNAT Community sources. This is for gnatcoll-iconv; not needed on
Windows.

@c debian/comm-2020 requires gnatcoll-iconv
@c debian/pro-21.1 requires gnatcoll-iconv

Then unpack, build, and install the required components. If you are
unsure whether you need to install iconv, skip that step; a later step
will complain if it is needed.

If @code{./setup.py} complains it can't find @code{python}, try
@code{python3 setup.py ...}.

For github gnatcoll-db version 21.2, apply gnatcoll-2021-sql.diff.

@example
unzip ~/Downloads/gnatcoll-bindings-22.2.zip
cd gnatcoll-bindings-22.2
cd iconv
./setup.py build
./setup.py install

unzip ~/Downloads/gnatcoll-db-22.2.zip
cd gnatcoll-db-22.2
make -C sql
make -C sql install
make -C sqlite
make -C sqlite install
make -C xref
make -C xref install
@end example

@c To build gnatcoll-core with debug, edit the corresponding gpr file
@c to delete @code{-gnatwe} (there are lots of warnings about license
@c incompatibility, and a few other things). Then _do not_ build or
@c install; just setup to create the .gpr files. Installing causes
@c lots of spurious warnings about files need to be
@c recompiled. Uninstall core, sql, sqlite, xref; add the build
@c directories to GPR_PROJECT_PATH, add @code{BUILD=DEBUG} to the
@c command line, edit the .gpr files to set OS. Sigh; that still
@c doesn't work.

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include doclicense.texi

@end ifnottex
